Once around Epsilon Lyra.
So this is a favorite of mine for our
observing sessions. Epsilon Lyra just to
the left of the bright star Vega. Um
this makes it the fifth brightest star
in the constellation of Lyra, but often
overlooked in fact um because the
brightness of its near neighbor Vega at
magnitude zero is so uh overpowering.
It's relatively nearby, 160 light years,
so not quite in the sun's backyard, but
it's nevertheless not a very distant
star. And that gives us the opportunity
to see it in quite uh reasonable detail
with a pair of binoculars. When you look
at epsylon, you immediately notice that
there are two components, epsilon 1 and
epsilon 2. These are 28 arcseconds
apart. So that's a significant fraction
of a degree. And the reason for that is
that they're 10,000 astronomical units
separated from each other in an orbit
that takes 400,000 years to rotate. So
not a spectator sport watching them go
round. But nevertheless, it's an
interesting object to look at with
binoculars or indeed a small telescope.
And if you have a small telescope and
good seeing conditions or perhaps
slightly better equipment, then you
notice that each of the two components
are themselves double. So epsilon 1 and
epsilon 2 are both double stars and the
two subcomponents are just 2.5 arcsec
apart. So you do need quite good
conditions and quite good optics to be
able to see these as separate. So a nice
photograph of them there and another one
here showing the two primary components
and then insert the splits of each of
them and they are at right angles to
each other like this. So um that's their
current position angle.
For the epsilon 1 pair, you've got a
brighter mag 4.7 and a fainter 6.2
uh orbiting around each other 184
astronomical units, the Earth's sun
distance, um apart, and they take 1,800
years or so to go round. And the epsilon
2 pair are a little bit more equal, both
magnitude 5 and a little bit uh more
rapid. They go around in 725 years. And
so since observations of these have been
made, we have noticed that the position
angle on the sky, the uh line between
them is rotating around uh for both of
these pairs, it's uh enough that we can
measure it.
So all four of the stars rather than
going through them individually, uh
because they're actually very similar,
they're in the range of 2 times the
sun's mass, 1.61 61 for the small faint
one up to 2.15 for the largest brightest
one. And we classify them in the white
star category. Uh F0, A3, A6, and A7.
So, um fairly similar to each other. The
the F star is the uh coolest and the
lightest weight that has a temperature
just over 7,000 Kelvin and the others is
getting on for 8,000. So definitely um
in the white region of the Herzbrung
Russell diagram
and these are modestly young stars just
800 million years old. So much much
younger than our sun. And uh of course
that makes sense because
stars that are double the mass are going
to live about six times less in terms of
their lifetime. So rather than surviving
for 10 billion years as our sun will,
these guys are going to uh have a
lifetime of about 1 and a half billion
years perhaps. And so 800 million puts
them halfway through their evolutionary
cycle.
And so we see this double double with
our telescopes and uh love projecting it
onto the screen for the public observing
evenings that we do because uh it's
quite unusual. But there is a fifth
component to this double double. So we
should perhaps think up a new name for
it. And this fifth star orbits one of
the stars in the epsilon 2 pairing. Now
I haven't got a full image of this. It's
detected by speckle interferometry back
in 1985. Back in the 80s, speckle
interpherometry was the way ahead and it
relied on taking rapid images of the sky
of high resolution looking at stars and
seeing the dot of the star dance around
across the sensor of your camera. And if
you were quick enough at taking the
images, you could catch a much higher
resolution set of frames.
Uh that's been followed up more
recently. Nowadays, we do what's called
lucky imaging for all kinds of things,
not just individual stars, but planets,
galaxies, and everything where computer
techniques are able to take out the uh
wobble and the turbulence caused by the
earth's atmosphere. So this was uh found
in this way back in the 80s and it's
very very close indeed. The orbit is
just tens of years and the separation
just 0.1 arcseconds.
That's very tight indeed. Typical
atmospheric conditions for amateur
astronomy mean that the best you could
hope for is uh perhaps a third of an
arcsec in resolution. So this is beyond
the capabilities of uh most uh even the
best amateur equipment.
That's why I don't have an image of it.
Um but just to put that in context, an
arcsec is a 60th of a minute, which is a
60th of a degree. Um so this is
136,000th of a degree separation. That's
uh uh amazingly tight indeed.
And the reason that we struggle not only
because of the atmospheric turbulence
but because of the nature of our optics
is all down to the phenomenon of optical
defraction. If you have light passing
through an aperture then it has a
tendency to spread out and the smaller
the aperture the wider the angle that it
will uh spread. So in fact the uh aim of
having a larger collecting area not only
makes your image brighter but it gives
you this wider diameter and therefore
less of a defraction effect on the
images.
Here's a picture of a laser beam being
passed through a tiny hole.
And this is creating a set of very wide
defraction rings. interference of the
waves of the coherent laser light coming
through the hole through the pinhole
just 90 micrometers across and creating
a dot in the center surrounded by what's
called the airy disc, a set of
interference rings of constructive and
destructive interference alternating.
And so actually this rather limits your
ability to get the finest resolution
because even that central region is
larger than the uh dot that you're
looking for. If you make two holes in
your piece of uh uh screen and you bring
them closer and closer together, then
the airy discs from the two will merge
together
and at a certain point you get an image
like uh the one at the bottom there
where it becomes impossible to tell that
there were in fact two separate objects
at all. And this is the defraction
limit. Now for typical optical
telescopes used by amateur astronomers,
we have a formula for this called the
doors limit invented by the Reverend
William Rutter Doors, very famous
British uh astronomer. We have one of
the telescopes um in one of the domes
that used to belong to Doors actually on
site in Cambridge. It's an 8 1/2 in
refrator. Very nice instrument indeed.
But doors worked out that there was a
rule of thumb where if you're dealing
with optical light, the
uh smallest angular separation r was
11.6 divided by d where d was the
diameter in centimeters. I think in fact
he used inches and this has been upcon
converted to centm to be a little bit
more up to date. But uh anyway, so if
you work that out for typical
telescopes, so it's a picture of my uh
new telescope and my son and the older
10-in telescope stood on the floor next
to it. So if we had a 75 mm 3-in
telescope, doors limit tells us that the
best we can do is 1.5 arcsec. go to a 8
in 200 millimeter telescope drops to
0.58 of an arcsec. Um, and if you happen
to have the kek 10 meter telescope in
your backyard, you could get to uh
0.0116
arcsec.
So that would be enough to be able to
generate an image of something um if it
were not for all of the atmospheric
turbulence
uh which as I said limits the
observations to about.3 of an arcsec.
Now there are things you can do about
that and we'll come on to those but just
before we move on away from the pure
doors limit I've got a little comment
for you which is a question that I
sometimes get asked. So, how big a
telescope would you need in order to be
able to see the stars and stripes on the
moon?
And if you plug in the numbers, you can
work out what the diameter of the uh
telescope mirror you would need in order
to get an image of the flag would be.
And the answer is that it would need to
be 25 kilometers across. Absolutely
enormous. a thousand times bigger and
and more than the largest telescope
that's operational at the moment in
terms of optical telescopes. Um we are
building some that are up to 40 m. Um so
we'll only be a factor of several
hundred away from being able to do this.
But we can do better. a technique that
was pioneered here in Cambridge by
Martin Riyle back after the Second World
War with a lot of surplus radio
equipment and radar equipment. He was
able to set up the Mullard
uh radio telescope observatory which is
shown against the night sky in the
bottom picture there with several of the
radio dishes. You've got the 4C array on
the right there, which is a great big
long instrument that could only be moved
in one axis and relied on the Earth's
rotation in the other. And then you've
got dishes from the one mile and the
halfmile long arrays. And it was those
half mile and mile long arrays that were
the first where the signals were
captured in several dishes brought
together and combined to make high
resolution pictures.
Now you can do that with radio waves
because the wavelength is very long. The
frequency is therefore low and low
enough that the computer technology that
was just beginning to emerge in Ri's
time was able to track the phase. You
could use uh valve based equipment to
be able to bring the phase of the
signals from the different telescopes
together. And you have to get that phase
right, otherwise the image is going to
uh scramble itself and cancel out. Um,
and of course, this is why it's much
easier with longer wavelengths, uh,
lower frequencies. We still can't really
do this uh with optical equipment. Our
computers are just not fast enough for
the extraordinary high frequency of
optical light.
Now the two pictures at the top there
are of the uh image of a black hole the
accretion disc around it which was made
by the event horizon telescope and
that's not one telescope that's radio
telescopes in fact from the locations
all over the world making the effect of
one very very large earthsized
telescope able to capture at
extraordinary detail. So, uh if you
plugged the uh size of the earth into
your appropriate doors limit, you could
work out what the resolution would be.
Now, of course, actually with longer
wavelengths, the uh doors limit has to
be corrected, but you have to really
divide by the wavelength of the light in
performing the calculations. So you can
end up uh dividing by uh the much longer
waves of radio and find that the limit's
not going to be as good. So um there's a
trade-off to be had here. But really
what we needed to do was to bring
together optical images from separated
small mirrors. And that was first done
using Coast, the Cambridge optical
aperture synthesis telescope, which is
this instrument in the top picture,
which looks like a set of beehives
really, but it's actually four mirrors
that are uh 1 m sized mirrors and can be
moved around
up to 100 m apart. It's on the Mard
site. You can see one of the radio
telescopes just peeking into the picture
in the background there. Um, but the
white units contain the mirrors that
captures the information and the light
sends it down the tubes and then those
tubes emerge into the secret underground
laboratory which looks like something
out of James Bond. And this is a photo
that I took on a visit there a few years
ago uh of the optical bench. You can see
there are four channels. The images from
the mirrors come in down those channels
and then they are corrected. There's
lots of computer equipment that is able
to bring the
images together and combine them to
produce an extraordinarily sharp
picture. And in fact, the image there in
orange, that's the star Capella, which
is shown as two separate components
here, which was the first time these two
components had been split and imaged by
an optical instrument. Um, and the
resolution is with this down to a
thousandth of an arcsecond.
It's also able to correct for the
atmospheric turbulence. The mirrors are
fairly small and so the column of light
that each is looking through is not
particularly subject to too much
turbulence and the difference between
the turbulence in the different images
is such that
um it's able to be corrected by the
optical path that's trying to sort out
the phase anyway. So it's a combination
of aperture synthesis and adaptive
optics to use the terminology.
And so this is a a technique that's now
been widely adopted. The VT in Chile has
four 7 m dishes separated and able to
operate as one optical interferometer.
Um and this technique is being used
elsewhere as well.
And so just to wrap up with Epsil on
Lyra, we've looked at the double double
and the fifth component. And in fact,
there are more stars listed as possibly
being associated with the double double,
potentially five more. These are much
fainter, magnitude 10 all the way down
to magnitude 14. and we're not sure if
they're actually associated with this uh
grouping in space or whether it's a line
of sight effect. So uh watch this space.
We may get more information on that as
we go forward. So thanks very much for
listening. I hope you've enjoyed that
trip once around epsylon lyra the double
double and I hope you get out and have a
look at it. Thanks. Bye.